distinguish starting an active span and creating an inactive span (#485)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/api-tracing.md

### Tracer operations

> The currently active `Span` for a `Tracer` is one that is tracked in the current

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The currently active `Span` for a `Tracer` is the one that is tracked in the current
```
In order to stress that there can only be one active span per tracer at a time.

`Context` by the `Tracer`. An inactive `Span` is not currently tracked in any
`Context`.

The `Tracer` MUST provide functions to:

- Start a new active `Span`
- Start a new inactive `Span`

The `Tracer` SHOULD provide methods to:

- Get the currently active `Span`

> - Make a given `Span` active

Reviewer: If providing a method to start an inactive span is a MUST, this should also be one, right?

Author: Hm, good question. I suppose so.

Reviewer: Me too! So please add it to the MUST section then.

Reviewer: Me too! So please add it to the MUST section then.

The `Tracer` MUST internally leverage the `Context` in order to get and set the
currently active `Span` and how `Span`s are passed across process boundaries. A
`Span` that is started but inactive is not tracked in the `Context` by the
`Tracer`, but it still MUST have a start timestamp set at the time of creation.

When getting the current span, the `Tracer` MUST return a placeholder `Span`
with an invalid `SpanContext` if there is no currently active `Span`.

> When starting or creating a new `Span`, the `Tracer` MUST allow the caller to

Reviewer: You mentioned there shouldn't be a way to create a span without starting it so I find the wording "starting **or** creating" confusing. I'd either imply that creating a span also means starting it or remove the "create" wording entirely.

Author: Fixed in latest commit, only "starting" is used now.

### Tracer operations

The currently active `Span` is the one that is tracked in the current `Context`

> by the `Tracer`. An inactive `Span` is not currently tracked in any `Context`.

Reviewer: An inactive span can still be tracked in a non-current context, right?

Reviewer 2: no, it would make it active (unless you track via some private mechanism, which would be out of scope here)

Reviewer 3: Actually in Java (and most likely in Python) you can have a `Span` in a `Context` that **is not** the active one:

```java
// ctx contains span1 but ctx itself is not active.
Context ctx = TracingContextUtils.withSpan(span1, Context.current());

// *Now* it is.
try (Scope scope = ContextUtils.withScopedContext(ctx)) {
}
```

Because of this I suggest changing the second sentence to: "A Span is considered inactive when it is not tracked in the currently active Context." or something along that.

Author: I'd consider that span to be active for that context, but the context itself is not active.

We could have a different term for it though, "current span" to replace how I've been using "active span". So a span can be "current" to a context without being active because the context is not active.

Reviewer 3: I suggest, for the sake of moving on with this PR, to not change the wording between active/current, and use whatever is used in the given section (we *could* do a follow up this in another PR). Likewise, let's use active/current only when the Span is associated with the **current** `Context` (else, you'd say its **associated** with a given `Context`).

The `Tracer` MUST provide functions to:

> - Start a new active `Span`

Reviewer 2: This sounds like a requirement on the API, but, for example, in OpenTracing we explicitly _removed_ such ability, in favor of starting inactive span and them manually activating it via Scope. What are the implications of this change?

NB: this kind of change sounds to me like it should go through OTEP with some code examples.

Reviewer 3: IIRC there was agreement to clearly separate these two operations ("start active Span" and "start Span"), but "start active Span" MUST be optional (in Java, as you mentioned, we can't implement this one correctly).

Reviewer 3: Let's go with separate operations as decided in the SIG call, but I'd suggest changing this to:

1. Start a new Span
2. Start a new Span as the current instance (optional operation).

2 is optional as, for example, Go already handles this explicitly in 1) depending on any specified `Context`, and also because in Java we won't implement it.

Author: @carlosalberto is this what you are thinking:

```
The `Tracer` MUST provide functions to:

- Start a new active `Span`

The `Tracer` SHOULD provide methods to:

- Get the currently active `Span`
- Start a new inactive `Span`
- Make a given `Span` active
```

Author: Or wait, you wanted the start inactive span to be the `MUST`?

Author: OK, switched it in the PR.

- Start a new inactive `Span`
- Make a given `Span` active

The `Tracer` SHOULD provide methods to:

> - Get the currently active `Span`

Reviewer 2: it looks odd that making span active is in MUST section, but getting active span is in SHOULD. I would think they should go in the same category.

Reviewer 3: I think #527 might actually hit this one, so I'd suggest we fix that based on that one ;)

The `Tracer` MUST internally leverage the `Context` in order to get and set the
currently active `Span` and how `Span`s are passed across process boundaries. A
`Span` that is started but inactive is not tracked in the `Context` by the

> `Tracer`, but it still MUST have a start timestamp set at the time of creation.

Reviewer 2: why is the point about the timestamp bundled into the paragraph about context?

Reviewer 3: Same feeling here, I think we don't need to mention timestamp. Having two separated operations for start-span and start-span-as-current should make this clear enough.

Author: Ok, I was thinking that "inactive" may give the impression to someone that it could not have a timestamp. But since it is still called `start` and this is defined elsewhere it can be removed.

> A common case where starting an inactive `Span` is used is with asynchronous

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A common case of starting an inactive `Span` is with asynchronous
```

callbacks. Before the callback is set up, an inactive `Span` is started, with
the currently active `Span`, if one exists, as the parent. This new `Span` is
passed to the callback as an argument and to be set as active within the body of
the callback when it is run.

When getting the current span, the `Tracer` MUST return a placeholder `Span`
with an invalid `SpanContext` if there is no currently active `Span`.

When starting a new `Span`, the `Tracer` MUST allow the caller to specify the
new `Span`'s parent in the form of a `Span` or `SpanContext`. The `Tracer`

> SHOULD create each new `Span` as a child of its active `Span` unless an explicit

Reviewer 3: "a child of THE active" Span? Otherwise, it sounds like each `Tracer` can have its own active `Span`, which just adds excessive (and not needed) complexity.

parent is provided or the option to create a span without a parent is selected,

> or the current active `Span` is invalid. Last the `Tracer` would check if

Reviewer 2: "or the current active `Span` is invalid" doesn't seem to belong here (can be in `#determining-the-parent-span-from-a-context`).

> `Context` has an extracted `SpanContext`. See [Determining the Parent Span from

Reviewer 2: > Last the `Tracer` would check if `Context` has an extracted `SpanContext`

I don't follow why this is here.

Author: The paragraph is going through the ways a span's parent is set when a span is created. If that part is removed I think the whole thing should be removed and simply link to "Determining the Parent Span".

a Context](#determining-the-parent-span-from-a-context).

The `Tracer` SHOULD provide a way to update its active `Span` and MAY provide
convenience functions to manage a `Span`'s lifetime and the scope in which a
`Span` is active. When an active `Span` is made inactive, the previously-active

> `Span` SHOULD be made active. A `Span` may be finished (i.e. have a non-null end

Reviewer 2: iirc the APIs have `span.end()` method. I would be in favor of renaming it to `finish()`, but until that's done, the prose should not be referring to "finished spans", but to "ended spans" for consistency.

Reviewer 3: @yurishkuro +1 on being renamed to `finish()`

Reviewer 3: Already covered in #514 (and even discussed) so resolving this conversation.

### Tracer operations

> The currently active `Span` for a `Tracer` is the one that is tracked in the current

Reviewer 3: "that is associated to the current" could probably be used (we used such sentence when including the new OTEP 66 changes).

Not sure about the "for a Tracer" part - as we don't expect to have per-`Tracer` active `Span` (maybe this is not what you meant, but in any case it could create confusion).

Author: Fixing this.

`Context` by the `Tracer`. An inactive `Span` is not currently tracked in any
`Context`.

The `Tracer` MUST provide functions to:

- Start a new active `Span`
- Start a new inactive `Span`

The `Tracer` SHOULD provide methods to:

- Get the currently active `Span`
- Make a given `Span` active

The `Tracer` MUST internally leverage the `Context` in order to get and set the

> currently active `Span` and how `Span`s are passed across process boundaries. A

Reviewer 3: I'm wondering if, having added the section on `Span` being active vs inactive above, we need to make another clarification on being inactive.

Author: Can you expand on this? There is a mention of it being started inactive in the next sentence here.

Reviewer 3: I mean, we already mentioning what it means for a `Span` being active or inactive above (in your own changes, that is). And actually I was referring to the line below:

> is not tracked in the `Context` by the `Tracer`

Mentioning it is inactive should be enough, I think.

The `Tracer` MUST provide functions to:

> - Start a new active `Span`

Reviewer 2: is there a definition earlier of what "Active Span" is?  I.e. that it's the span stored in the current context.

Author: Some what, "The `Tracer` is responsible for tracking the currently active `Span`", is before this.

> - Create a new inactive `Span`

Reviewer 2: "inactive" reads very confusing. I would separate "starting a span" and "making a span active" (even though both can be done by a single function).

The `Tracer` SHOULD provide methods to:

- Get the currently active `Span`
- Make a given `Span` as active

The `Tracer` MUST internally leverage the `Context` in order to get and set the
currently active `Span` and how `Span`s are passed across process boundaries. A

> `Span` that is created, as opposed to started, is not tracked in the `Context`

Reviewer 2: > created, as opposed to started

-1, this sounds like a whole new dimension of behavior. If you want to discuss this, please create an OTEP.

Author: It isn't. The created span still has a start timestamp.

MAY provide other default options for newly created `Span`s.

`Span` creation MUST NOT set the newly created `Span` as the currently
active `Span` by default. While starting a `Span` through a `Tracer` MUST

> set the `Span` as the currently active `Span`.

Reviewer 2: I don't follow. How else can a span be created if not through tracer?

Author: I can remove "through a `Tracer`" if that makes it confusing. The point is the difference between `starting` and `creating`.

I think `starting` being also what makes it active is confusing since `creating` also adds a start time, but I was working with the existing language and APIs.

Reviewer: This paragraph is redundant since you introduce the two operations "start an active span" and "start an inactive span" as MUST requirements above.

Author: I removed this so discussion of active/inactive is in the tracer operations.

MAY provide other default options for newly created `Span`s.

`Span` creation MUST NOT set the newly created `Span` as the currently
active `Span` by default. While starting a `Span` through a `Tracer` MUST
set the `Span` as the currently active `Span`.

A common case where creating a `Span` but not making it active is in the use of

> async callbacks. Before the callback is setup a `Span` is created, with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
async callbacks. Before the callback is setup, a `Span` is created, with the
```
(or is it _to set up_?)

Author: Fixed in latest commit.

currently active `Span`, if one exists, as the parent. This new `Span` is passed
to the callback as an argument and to be set as active within the body of the
callback when it is run.

> The API functions for starting and creating a `Span` MUST accept the following parameters:

Reviewer: Same as above: please decide for either creating (which includes starting) or starting (which includes creating) to avoid confusion.

Author: Fixed in latest commit, now only talks about "starting".

the currently active `Span` is set as the new `Span`'s parent. The `Tracer`
MAY provide other default options for newly created `Span`s.

The API functions for starting a `Span` MUST accept the following parameters:

- The span name. This is a required parameter.

> - The parent `Span` or a `Context` containing a parent `Span` or `SpanContext`,

Reviewer 2: this bullet is confusing. I think it's mutually exclusive to accept parent Span OR an indicator to create a new root.

Author: That is outside the changes of this PR. Though I agree there doesn't appear to be a reason to have to explicitly state if a span is a root span.

Reviewer 3: I think this will also be covered/clarified/improved by #510 so I'd suggest we work on this part there, so we can move on with this PR.

**Else**, track this clarification in its own issue ;)

the currently active `Span` is set as the new `Span`'s parent. The `Tracer`
MAY provide other default options for newly created `Span`s.

> The API functions for starting a `Span` MUST accept the following parameters:

Reviewer 3: Are we planning to have a follow-up PR to cover the `start span` vs `start active span` operations?

Author: Active vs inactive is a tracer/context concern and not a concern of the Span itself so I didn't plan to include anything about active/inactive in the Span operations section.

Author: I don't think there is anything new needed here. Is this the section you were referring to in our discussion though?

Reviewer 4: I feel like the calling pattern for starting active spans is going to be language-specific, and we don't need to say more at this level. LGTM.

Reviewer 3: @tsloughter It's actually enough with the separation of active vs inactive Span creation, so I'm fine here.

Reviewer 3: Resolving this part of the conversation.
